05.3-Apul-lncRNA-discovery
================
Steven Roberts
02 November, 2023

- <a href="#1-run-hisat-on-rna-seq" id="toc-1-run-hisat-on-rna-seq">1 Run
  HiSat on RNA-seq</a>
  - <a href="#11-grab-trimmed-rna-seq-reads"
    id="toc-11-grab-trimmed-rna-seq-reads">1.1 Grab Trimmed RNA-seq
    Reads</a>
  - <a href="#12-genome" id="toc-12-genome">1.2 Genome</a>
  - <a href="#13-hisat" id="toc-13-hisat">1.3 HiSat</a>
- <a
  href="#2-software-paths-to-necessary-tools-hisat2-samtools-stringtie-gffcompare-bedtools-and-coding-potential-calculator-2"
  id="toc-2-software-paths-to-necessary-tools-hisat2-samtools-stringtie-gffcompare-bedtools-and-coding-potential-calculator-2">2
  Software paths to necessary tools: HISAT2, Samtools, StringTie,
  GFFCompare, Bedtools, and Coding Potential Calculator 2</a>
- <a href="#3-samtools" id="toc-3-samtools">3 Samtools</a>
- <a
  href="#4-convert-sam-files-to-binary-alignment-map-bam-files-then-sorts-and-saves-them-in-the-apul_dirpushbam-directory-bam-files-save-on-storage-and-speed-up-the-next-step-in-processing"
  id="toc-4-convert-sam-files-to-binary-alignment-map-bam-files-then-sorts-and-saves-them-in-the-apul_dirpushbam-directory-bam-files-save-on-storage-and-speed-up-the-next-step-in-processing">4
  Convert SAM files to Binary Alignment Map (BAM) files, then sorts and
  saves them in the $APUL_DIR/push/bam directory. BAM files save on
  storage and speed up the next step in processing.</a>
- <a href="#5-stringtie" id="toc-5-stringtie">5 StringTie</a>
- <a
  href="#6-stringtie-uses-the-sorted-bam-files-to-assemble-transcripts-for-each-sample-outputting-them-as-gtf-gene-transfer-format-files-and-then-merges-all-individual-gtf-assemblies-into-a-single-merged-gtf-file-this-step-extracts-transcript-information-and-merges-gtfs-from-all-samplesan-important-step-in-creating-a-canonical-list-of-lncrnas-across-all-samples-included-in-the-pipeline"
  id="toc-6-stringtie-uses-the-sorted-bam-files-to-assemble-transcripts-for-each-sample-outputting-them-as-gtf-gene-transfer-format-files-and-then-merges-all-individual-gtf-assemblies-into-a-single-merged-gtf-file-this-step-extracts-transcript-information-and-merges-gtfs-from-all-samplesan-important-step-in-creating-a-canonical-list-of-lncrnas-across-all-samples-included-in-the-pipeline">6
  StringTie uses the sorted BAM files to assemble transcripts for each
  sample, outputting them as GTF (Gene Transfer Format) files. And then
  merges all individual GTF assemblies into a single merged GTF file. This
  step extracts transcript information and merges GTFs from all samples–an
  important step in creating a canonical list of lncRNAs across all
  samples included in the pipeline.</a>
- <a href="#7-gffcompare" id="toc-7-gffcompare">7 GFFcompare</a>
- <a href="#8-filter" id="toc-8-filter">8 Filter</a>
- <a href="#9-bedtools" id="toc-9-bedtools">9 Bedtools</a>
- <a href="#10-cpc2" id="toc-10-cpc2">10 CPC2</a>
- <a href="#11-final-filter" id="toc-11-final-filter">11 Final Filter</a>
- <a href="#12-de-duplicate-gtf" id="toc-12-de-duplicate-gtf">12
  De-duplicate GTF</a>
- <a href="#13-reformat-to-bed" id="toc-13-reformat-to-bed">13 Reformat to
  BED</a>
- <a href="#14-bedtools" id="toc-14-bedtools">14 BEDTools</a>

``` bash
# Software paths to necessary tools: HISAT2, Samtools, StringTie, GFFCompare, Bedtools, and Coding Potential Calculator 2
HISAT_PATH="/home/shared/hisat2-2.2.1"
SAMTOOLS_PATH="/home/shared/samtools-1.12"
STRINGTIE_PATH="/home/shared/stringtie-2.2.1.Linux_x86_64"
GFFCOMPARE_PATH="/home/shared/gffcompare-0.12.6.Linux_x86_64"
BEDTOOLS_PATH="/home/shared/bedtools2/bin"
CPC2_PATH="/home/shared/CPC2_standalone-1.0.1/bin"
```

    # Define directories and files
    ROOT_DIR="/home/shared" #root directory
    DATA_DIR="$ROOT_DIR/8TB_HDD_02/zbengt/github/coral-lncRNA/data" # data directory with reference genome data
    OUTPUT_DIR="$ROOT_DIR/8TB_HDD_02/zbengt/github/coral-lncRNA/push/output" #directory where final outputs output directory (smaller size files)
    APUL_DIR="$ROOT_DIR/8TB_HDD_01/apul" #directory with trimmed RNA-seq data and directories to house larger intermediate processing files  
    FASTA="$DATA_DIR/GCF_013753865.1_Amil_v2.1_genomic.fna" #DATA_DIR path with name of genomic fasta
    GFF="$DATA_DIR/GCF_013753865.1_Amil_v2.1_genomic.gff" #DATA_DIR path with genomic gff
    INDEX="$OUTPUT_DIR/Amil.index" #path to index created using HISAT build 

# 1 Run HiSat on RNA-seq

## 1.1 Grab Trimmed RNA-seq Reads

``` bash

wget -r \
--no-directories --no-parent \
-P ../data/fastq/ \
-A "*fastq.gz" https://gannet.fish.washington.edu/Atumefaciens/20230519-E5_coral-fastqc-fastp-multiqc-RNAseq/A_pulchra/trimmed/
```

## 1.2 Genome

``` bash
cd ../data

curl -O http://gannet.fish.washington.edu/seashell/snaps/GCF_013753865.1_Amil_v2.1_genomic.fna
```

## 1.3 HiSat

``` bash
/home/shared/hisat2-2.2.1/hisat2_extract_exons.py \
../data/Amil/ncbi_dataset/data/GCF_013753865.1/genomic.gtf \
> ../output/05.32-lncRNA-discovery/m_exon.tab
```

``` bash
head ../output/05.32-lncRNA-discovery/m_exon.tab
```

    ## NC_058066.1  1961    2118    -
    ## NC_058066.1  15360   15663   +
    ## NC_058066.1  18710   18774   -
    ## NC_058066.1  21000   21092   -
    ## NC_058066.1  22158   22442   +
    ## NC_058066.1  23084   23220   -
    ## NC_058066.1  24770   25066   +
    ## NC_058066.1  26652   26912   +
    ## NC_058066.1  27071   27358   +
    ## NC_058066.1  27658   27951   +

``` bash

/home/shared/hisat2-2.2.1/hisat2_extract_splice_sites.py \
../data/Amil/ncbi_dataset/data/GCF_013753865.1/genomic.gtf \
> ../output/05.32-lncRNA-discovery/m_splice_sites.tab
```

``` bash
head ../output/05.32-lncRNA-discovery/m_splice_sites.tab
```

    ## NC_058066.1  2118    18710   -
    ## NC_058066.1  15663   22158   +
    ## NC_058066.1  18774   21000   -
    ## NC_058066.1  21092   23084   -
    ## NC_058066.1  22442   24770   +
    ## NC_058066.1  25066   26652   +
    ## NC_058066.1  26912   27071   +
    ## NC_058066.1  27358   27658   +
    ## NC_058066.1  27951   28247   +
    ## NC_058066.1  28534   29196   +

``` bash
/home/shared/hisat2-2.2.1/hisat2-build \
../data/GCF_013753865.1_Amil_v2.1_genomic.fna \
../data/GCF_013753865.1_Amil_v2.1.index \
--exon ../output/05.32-lncRNA-discovery/m_exon.tab \
--ss ../output/05.32-lncRNA-discovery/m_splice_sites.tab \
-p 40 \
../data/Amil/ncbi_dataset/data/GCF_013753865.1/genomic.gtf \
2> ../output/05.32-lncRNA-discovery/hisat2-build_stats.txt
```

``` bash
find ../data/fastq/*gz \
| xargs basename -s -S1-TP2_R1_001.fastp-trim.20230519.fastq.gz | xargs -I{} \
/home/shared/hisat2-2.2.1/hisat2 \
-x ../data/GCF_013753865.1_Amil_v2.1.index \
-p 20 \
-1 ../data/fastq/{}-S1-TP2_R1_001.fastp-trim.20230519.fastq.gz \
-2 ../data/fastq/{}-S1-TP2_R2_001.fastp-trim.20230519.fastq.gz \
-S ../output/05.32-lncRNA-discovery/sam/{}.sam
```

# 2 Software paths to necessary tools: HISAT2, Samtools, StringTie, GFFCompare, Bedtools, and Coding Potential Calculator 2

HISAT_PATH=“$ROOT_DIR/hisat2-2.2.1" SAMTOOLS_PATH="$ROOT_DIR/samtools-1.12”
STRINGTIE_PATH=“$ROOT_DIR/stringtie-2.2.1.Linux_x86_64" GFFCOMPARE_PATH="$ROOT_DIR/gffcompare-0.12.6.Linux_x86_64”
BEDTOOLS_PATH=“$ROOT_DIR/bedtools2/bin" CPC2_PATH="$ROOT_DIR/CPC2_standalone-1.0.1/bin”

# 3 Samtools

# 4 Convert SAM files to Binary Alignment Map (BAM) files, then sorts and saves them in the \$APUL_DIR/push/bam directory. BAM files save on storage and speed up the next step in processing.

for file in $APUL_DIR/push/sam/*.sam; do base=$(basename “\$file” .sam)
$SAMTOOLS_PATH/samtools view -bS "$file” \|  
\$SAMTOOLS_PATH/samtools sort  
-o $APUL_DIR/push/bam/"$base”.bam done

# 5 StringTie

# 6 StringTie uses the sorted BAM files to assemble transcripts for each sample, outputting them as GTF (Gene Transfer Format) files. And then merges all individual GTF assemblies into a single merged GTF file. This step extracts transcript information and merges GTFs from all samples–an important step in creating a canonical list of lncRNAs across all samples included in the pipeline.

Merges all individual GTF assemblies into a single merged GTF file. find
$APUL_DIR/push/bam/*bam \
| xargs basename -s .bam | xargs -I{} \
$STRINGTIE_PATH/stringtie  
-p 8  
-G \$GFF  
-o $APUL_DIR/push/stringtie-assembly/{}.gtf \
$APUL_DIR/push/bam/{}.bam

\$STRINGTIE_PATH/stringtie  
–merge  
-G \$GFF  
-o $APUL_DIR/push/merged-gtf/stringtie_merged.gtf \
$APUL_DIR/push/stringtie-assembly/\*.gtf

# 7 GFFcompare

\#This step compares data to the reference GFF and classifies
transcripts based on their similarity to the reference. This classifies
known protein coding transcripts so that we can exclude them in the
following filtration step, since we are only interested in non-coding
transcripts. \$GFFCOMPARE_PATH/gffcompare  
-r \$GFF  
-G \$GFF  
-o $APUL_DIR/push/gffcompare/gffcompare_merged \
$APUL_DIR/push/merged-gtf/stringtie_merged.gtf

# 8 Filter

\#Filters the combined GTF output from GFFcompare to select only the
lines representing “transcripts” and excluding lines starting with “\#”
(these are lines in the output format from GFFcompare that don’t contain
transcript information). This step further filters for a class code of
“u”, and keep only those with lengths greater than 199 bases. The “u’
class code from the GFFcompare step is for”unknown” transcripts, that is
those that are not previously annotated in our reference GFF as protein
coding. The size filter of +200nt is a common filtering step for
isolating lncRNAs. awk ‘\$3 == “transcript” && \$1 !\~ /^#/ {print}’
\$APUL_DIR/push/gffcompare/gffcompare_merged.combined.gtf \| grep
‘class_code “u”’ \| awk ‘\$5 - \$4 \> 199 {print}’ \>
\$APUL_DIR/push/filter-one/merged_lncRNA_candidates.gtf

# 9 Bedtools

\#Extracts the sequence data from the `$FASTA` reference file based on
the coordinates from the filtered GTF. The resulting sequences represent
potential lncRNA candidates. \$BEDTOOLS_PATH/bedtools  
getfasta -fi \$FASTA -bed
\$APUL_DIR/push/filter-one/merged_lncRNA_candidates.gtf -fo
\$APUL_DIR/push/get-fasta/merged_lncRNA_candidates.fasta -name -split

# 10 CPC2

\#Initializes a conda environment (Anaconda) and runs CPC2, a software
to predict whether a transcript is coding or non-coding. The results are
saved to the
$OUTPUT_DIR. CPC2 uses ORF (Open Reading Frame) Analysis, Isometric Feature Mapping (Isomap), Sequence Homology, RNA Sequence Features, and Quality of Translation to assess coding potential and flag any transcripts we would want to exclude using the FASTA generated in the previous step. eval "$(/opt/anaconda/anaconda3/bin/conda
shell.bash hook)” python \$CPC2_PATH/CPC2.py -i
\$APUL_DIR/push/get-fasta/merged_lncRNA_candidates.fasta -o
\$OUTPUT_DIR/apul_merged_cpc2_results

# 11 Final Filter

\#Filters the CPC2 results to get only noncoding transcripts (using the
class “noncoding” from the CPC2 results) and extracts their IDs and
matches these IDs with the sequences from the previous step to generate
a GTF of long noncoding transcripts. Matches these IDs with the
sequences from the previous step to generate a GTF of noncoding
transcripts. awk ‘\$8 == “noncoding” {print \$1}’
\$OUTPUT_DIR/apul_merged_cpc2_results.txt \>
\$OUTPUT_DIR/apul_noncoding_transcripts_ids.txt grep -Fwf
\$OUTPUT_DIR/apul_noncoding_transcripts_ids.txt
\$APUL_DIR/push/get-fasta/merged_lncRNA_candidates.fasta \>
\$OUTPUT_DIR/apul_merged_final_lncRNAs.gtf

# 12 De-duplicate GTF

\#Removes duplicate entries from the GTF file. This results in a list of
lncRNAs with transcript IDs that show scaffold and base range. awk
‘!seen$$\$0$$++’ \$OUTPUT_DIR/apul_merged_final_lncRNAs.gtf \>
\$OUTPUT_DIR/apul_deduplicated_final_lncRNAs.gtf

# 13 Reformat to BED

\#Converts the GTF format to BED (Browser Extensible Data) format, a
commonly used format for representing genomic intervals. This allows us
to use bedtools to generate a FASTA of lncRNAs. awk -F”:\|-” ‘{print \$3
“ \$4” \$5}’ \$OUTPUT_DIR/apul_deduplicated_final_lncRNAs.gtf \>
\$OUTPUT_DIR/apul_deduplicated_final_lncRNAs.bed

# 14 BEDTools

\#This extracts sequences from the reference FASTA based on the BED
file’s coordinates. The resulting sequences represent the final set of
non-redundant lncRNAs. \$BEDTOOLS_PATH/bedtools  
getfasta -fi \$FASTA -bed
\$OUTPUT_DIR/apul_deduplicated_final_lncRNAs.bed -fo
\$OUTPUT_DIR/apul_bedtools_lncRNAs.fasta -name \`\`\`

The results of this pipleine provide the user with GTF files containing
transcript IDs (scaffold and sequence range), BED files displaying the
same transcript IDs in BED format for use with BEDtools, and FASTA files
containing the sequence of identified lncRNAs.
